# 4) Intro to C

## Compiling a C program

Contrary to the examples you have seen in the previous lectures in Julia, C programs need to be compiled first, before being executed. This is a drawback of a compiled language (e.g., C, Fortran, Java, etc) Vs an interpreted language (e.g., MATLAB, Python, Julia, etc) in which the interpreter compiles and executes at the same time.

To compile a C program, you need a compiler. This may vary accoriding to the system you use. For:

* Linux: [`gcc`](https://gcc.gnu.org/)
* Mac: [`Xcode/clang`](https://clang.llvm.org/get_started.html)
* Windows: [`Visual Studio C/C++`](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/features/cplusplus/)

Example in Linux, using `gcc`:

```
gcc 2024-09-09-intro_to_c_programs.c -o 2024-09-09-intro_to_c_programs
```

The `gcc` command invokes the compiler, then you pass the source file you want to compile (`2024-09-09-intro_to_c_programs.c` in this case), and then after the `-o` target, you can specify the output file for the compiled program (otherwise, the compiler will automatically create `a.out`) for you.

Inspect the directory after compiling, and (if the compilation was successful) you will an object output file (by default `a.out`) or the name of the executable you provided after the `-o` option.

To run/execute your program, simply type `./name_of_your_program` in your terminal:

```
./2024-09-09-intro-to-c-programs

```

## Variables and Basic Data Types

Our first C program: a `Hello, World!` print statement.

```c
#include <stdio.h> // includes the standard input-output header to be able to use standard IO functions, such as printf() and scanf(), to perform input and output operations.

// a "main" program is required in all C programs
int main()
{
     printf("Hello, world!\n"); // this printf statement will print formatted output in the standard output (your terminal screen)
}

```

Displaying Values of Variables
```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void)
{
    int product; // declaration of an integer variable
    product = 9*2*3;
    printf("The product of 9, 2, and 3 is %i \n", product); // this printf statement will print formatted output in the standard output (your terminal screen)

    return 0;
}
```

### Variables
Note:
- In C, you need to declare the variable type before the variable is used
- Variable names begin with letters, `_`, followed by combination of letters, `_`, or digits `0-9`
- Do not use reserved words

### Basic Data Types
- `int`, `float`, `double`, `char` (single character), `_Bool`
- Constant: any number, single character or character string
- Constant expressions: entirely of constant values

**int**
- Integer constant: consist of one or more digits (IEEE)
- Decimal, octal (`0`, `%o`, `%#o`), and hexadecimal (`0x`, `%x`,`%#x`, `0X`, `%X`, `%#X`) notations
- Range of values of int are associated to the type amount
of storage. Typically machine and architecture dependent
6float or double

**float** or **double**
- Floating-point constants (decimal point), (IEEE)
- A variable type double can store roughly twice as many
significant digits as can a variable type float
- Floating and scientific notation (mantissa d. and exponent)
- `%f`, `%e`, `%g` (if `< −4` or `> 5`, `%e` is used)
- Hexadecimal floating constants (`0x0.Ap10` is $10/16 × 2^{10}$)

```c
float
length = 190.4;
printf("Length= %f \n",length);
```

**char**
- Variable of type char can store a single character (enclosed by quotes)
- Special characters (e.g., `\n`)
- char characterVar = `z`;
- `printf("Character variable %c\n", characterVar);`

**Bool**
- Variable of type `_Bool` takes only values `0` [or `false`]  and `1` [or `true`]
- When assigning, `0` stores `0` in the variable whereas any nonzero stores `1`
- `_Bool` `booleanVar` = 9;
- `printf("Boolean variable %i\n", booleanVar);`


**Displaying Values of Variables**

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main (void)
{
    int integerVar = 230;
    float floatVar = 626.32;
    double doubleVar = 3.24e+3;
    char charVar = 'a';
    _Bool boolVar = 0;

    printf("integer variable= %i \n",integerVar);
    printf("float variable = %f \n", floatVar);
    printf("double variable = %e \n", doubleVar);
    printf("char variable = %c \n", charVar);
    printf("boolean variable = %i \n", boolVar);

    return 0;
}
```

```bash
integer variable= 230
float variable = 626.320007
double variable = 3.240000e+03
char variable = a
boolean variable = 0
```
